---
lang: en
layout: post
title: "History"
summary: History of Slovenian computers.
categories: post-en
permalink: en/history
featured-img: zgodovina
herofoto: hero/zgodovina.jpg
---

The following list contains several shorter articles describing our understanding of the field. We also compiled some lists, for example, chronology of events, examples of technology use, etc. The topics we have examined certainly do not cover the whole of everything that happened in the aforementioned times in Slovenia, but mainly represent the areas for which we managed to obtain information, resources and other material during the project. Our starting point was, above all, the developments regarding Iskra Delta, but then gradually, during the course of the project, we included other equally important actors.

-----

## Historical Framework

Thinking of computers of old, one normally pictures enormous machines that take up entire
rooms, are without monitors, consume great amounts of energy, cost a fortune, but can only
carry out a few of the simplest of tasks. Such machines began emerging around the year 1950,
but decades of progress enabled them to become ever smaller while their performance levels
kept rising. Most people consider the IBM 5150 model of 1981 to be the first personal
computer, as it could fit on a desk, came with a monitor and keyboard, and was financially
accessible to consumers. The decade from 1970 to 1980 also saw the emergence of Slovene
companies and factories focused on developing quality and useful computers. This historical
framework presents the most important events of Slovene contribution to the global computer
heritage.

## Manufacturer overview

When the information revolution began shaping the world, the list of the most important
agents involved included companies such as IBM, DEC, Apple, Commodore, Sinclair, and
Microsoft. Slovenia (at the time a part of Yugoslavia), however, was home to Iskra Delta, a
company that matched the vision of the other tech giants, as well as other companies that
manufactured computers and terminals such as Tovarna meril (Measurements Factory),
Gorenje, which in 1980 developed the Gorenje Dialog computer, and KOPA, which in 1982
made the KOPA 2500 computer.

- [Company Elektrotehna](elektrotehna)
- [Company Delta](delta)
- [Educational center Delta](edu_center_delta)
- [Company Iskra Delta](iskra_delta)
- [Company Gorenje](gorenje)
- [Company Kopa](kopa)

## Other

Hera are other relevant information connected to slovenian computer heritage.

 - [Examples of computer use](computer_use)
 - [Chronology of important events](chronology)
